---
layout: post
title: The Great Bitcoin Scaling Debate — An Annotated Timeline
---

This is a long, working document that is nowhere near complete. I attempt to show through a chronology of primary source material that Bitcoin was systematically hijacked and directed against its original vision of scaling on-chain. 

I do not claim that scaling on-chain is the proper way to scale Bitcoin, only that it was the way *intended* by Satoshi Nakamoto and early Bitcoiners, and that technical and economic arguments against scaling on-chain played a less important role in the eventual outcome than censorship, propaganda, etc.

### 29 October 1995

In a discussion about Digicash on the Cypherpunk Mailing List, 
James A. Donald [critisizes](http://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1995/10/cedf031887bdce1f992b8382dc4c27486c61a68bebd117b9bf2818fa2d6dbe23/) 
the early electronic cash for having high fees.

>While Chaum is a brilliant cryptographer, he is an incompetent businessman
>
>He has demonstrated this in numerous ways.
>
>The latest being "Cash" where the bank skims off 4% to 10% every time.
>
>No one is going to use digicash under these kinds of terms and 
conditions.

### 30 Oct 1995

Creator of the Cypherpunk Mailing List Timothy C. May [responds](http://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1995/10/cedf031887bdce1f992b8382dc4c27486c61a68bebd117b9bf2818fa2d6dbe23/) 
in agreement.

>I don't know if the "skims off 4% to 10% every time" point accurately
describes how the current Digicash model works, but certainly this will not
fly as a long term rate. So many monetary transactions happen in the course
of business that even a 4% fee _per transaction_ would rapidly wipe out
most of the value.

### 14 June 1996

Hal Finney argues for the [utility of online micropayments](http://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1996/06/b2345507ef1258011af9ea463ae9b03714f5cd29c4092458bd0002b360f1d545/) on the Cypherpunk Mailing List.

>Consider two sites, one which acts as a proxy and cache but which
charges something under a penny per page, and another which acts for
free.  Won't the for-pay site be able to afford a larger disk, more
servers, and better net connections?  It will be a superior service.
>
>Micropayments will allow new services and improved quality over what we
have today where we have to rely on charity and advertising as
motivations for much of what we find on the web.

### 02 May 1997

Blockstream founder and Hashcash inventor Adam Back [writes](http://mailing-list-archive.cryptoanarchy.wiki/archive/1997/05/ef17e389556d2b6e27e8e0036a85ce1fedc73e2de871cc30728e7fc8be3d7f09/) 
on the Cypherpunk Mailing List that a successful digital cash project must be ultra low cost to transact with.

>What we want is fully anonymous, *ultra low transaction cost,* transferable units of exchange.  If we get that going the banks will become the obsolete dinasaurs they deserve to become.

### May 1999

Nick Szabo publishes [*Micropayments and Mental Transaction Costs.*](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/static/docs/micropayments-and-mental-transaction-costs.pdf) The paper argues against the viability of online micropayments and suggests security is a more important investment than reducing network resource usage to enable cheaper transactions.

>A lesson for micropayment efforts is that mental costs usually exceed, and
often dwarf, the computational costs. Reductions in the per transaction computational costs of transactions may often be economically insignificant. Other transaction costs addressable by hardware or software, such as security concerns,
as well as costs of better communicating product quality versus price tradeoffs
in the user interface, are usually more important ob jectives for technological
cost reduction than conserving on computational or network resources.

### ~ 2002

Sometime in 2002 (exact date unknown), Nick Szabo publishes [*Shelling Out -- The Origins of Money.*](http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/shell.html) The paper presents a theory of the beginnings of money that would later come to dominate part of the future Bitcoin community.

### 22 January 2006

Future Blockstream Cofounder Greg Maxwell is [accused of vandalism, bullying, terrorist sympathizing, sockpupettry and more on Wikipedia.](https://np.reddit.com/r/btc/comments/45ail1/wikipedians_on_greg_maxwell_in_2006_now_cto_of/)

>(Copied from WP:AN/3RR, because there were edits that amounted to vandalism, as well as excessive reverting)
>
>He has reverted Template:User freedom seven times despite repeated calls to stop from multiple editors. The version he is reverting to is far different from what the creators and users intended it for. I consider these edits to be an act of vandalism.

>I'm also surprised by the length of the block, because he was engaged in vandalism, not just edit warring. I'd block him myself but I was involved in a dispute with him over an image recently. Three examples of the edits I see as vandalism: he changed a box supporting the American military to one supporting the Iraqi insurgents. He inserted an image of a woman "hogtied" and gagged into a box opposing fox hunting, and changed the fox hunting link to BDSM. On Template:Wikiproject Terrorism, he replaced the image of a terrorist with one of a nuclear explosion.  

>Alert to all admins. Gmaxwell is going around to every user page that displays any kind of thumbnail or flag from Wikipedia Commons and declaring them "copyright violation". He is then blanking the user page and putting up a copyright violation notice. Is there any justification for this?

>Yes, I inadvertently fell foul of that a while ago. On that occasion, though, the person who alerted me merely removed the image and left me a polite note in explanation. Gmaxwell has for some time been behaving very oddly and aggressively with regard to image violations (real or occasionally imagined). Here, he's misapplying a rule about fair-use images to the use of public-domain images, and doing so in a heavy-handed manner.

>I've spoken to him several times about his aggression, since a dispute I had with him recently about an image (in which he called me "hysterical" and accused me of vandalism because I dared to revert his removal of it). What with this today and his behavior last night (see above), I'm unsure of the best way is to proceed, but something needs to happen.

>His behaviour is outrageous. Firstly, where fairuse images are wrongly on user pages it is invariably due to a misunderstanding, not an attempt to break the law. All he had to do was leave a message, not post a massive notice all but accusing the user of being a lawbreaker. Secondly, he is not removing the offending image, but all images, even those that can be displayed. Thirdly, blanking a user's page is grossly disrespectful to other users. Frankly, he is out of control at this stage. This bullying behavour of his has to stop.

>I move that all his edits be reverted and considered petty vandalism, and that the said user be blocked for a period of one week. We don't have time to entertain him or his dubious edits.

>OK, his contribs list is beyond the pale. It's vandalism, pretty clearly.

>On the evidence, it seems that Majorityrule was a sockpuppet of Gmaxwell. I have extended Maxwell's block to one week. Given his behaviour, if they are an admin perhaps a move should be made to have them desysoped.

>He isn't an admin and supeficially performing exactly the same set of edits does suggest a sock puppet (my initial reaction), though of course it's possible that it is someone up to mischief.

>He's not known for making "reasonable, patient attempts to protect the Foundation," unfortunately, but for acts of aggression that have led other users to leave the project. I'm concerned that, in his most recent statements, he has announced his intention to continue being disruptive, and has said he'll evade any blocks that are applied. That's a direct threat to the project, not an attempt to protect it.

>Today he seemed to indicate he has no intention of following our policies:
>
>"Like I give a crap about being blocked, it doesn't even inhibit me from editing."
>
>"Man. You think I've stopped because I'm blocked? Please! Blocking doesn't actually stop anyone but twits!" 
>
>"You're still wrong about me being blocked accomplishing *anything*, since I can still edit whenever I please... in fact, being blocked gives me far less incentive to be nice about it, in so far as there can be far less than nearly none at all."
>
>"I feel great because I can still do what I want, and I don't have to worry what rude jerks think about me ... I can continue to do whatever I think is right without the burden of explaining myself to a shreaking [sic] mass of people." 
>
>That's not even to mention the personal attacks.

>My opinion of this user is that he is a very dangerous individual whose edits speak for themselves. Full of sarcasm, threats, rude insults, impersonations of an admin, not to mention massive disprect of other users and blanking of user pages. I'm all about forgiving, but this is banable behavior. If further incidents occur, a ban would be warranted. 

### 16 April 2008

Early Bitcoin code generated by Satoshi prior to the release of Bitcoin shows [scraps of code for an online poker game,](https://sourceforge.net/p/bitcoin/code/1/tree/trunk/uibase.cpp) suggesting Satoshi intended from the start that Bitcoin would be useable for small online payments.
	
```
CPokerLobbyDialogBase::~CPokerLobbyDialogBase()
{
    // Disconnect Events
    m_treeCtrl->Disconnect(wxEVT_COMMAND_TREE_SEL_CHANGED, wxTreeEventHandler(CPokerLobbyDialogBase::OnTreeSelChanged), NULL, this);
    m_listCtrl->Disconnect(wxEVT_COMMAND_LIST_ITEM_ACTIVATED, wxListEventHandler(CPokerLobbyDialogBase::OnListItemActivated), NULL, this);
    m_listCtrl->Disconnect(wxEVT_COMMAND_LIST_ITEM_SELECTED, wxListEventHandler(CPokerLobbyDialogBase::OnListItemSelected), NULL, this);
    m_buttonNewTable->Disconnect(wxEVT_COMMAND_BUTTON_CLICKED, wxCommandEventHandler(CPokerLobbyDialogBase::OnButtonNewTable), NULL, this);
}

CPokerDialogBase::CPokerDialogBase(wxWindow* parent, wxWindowID id, const wxString& title, const wxPoint& pos, const wxSize& size, long style) : wxFrame(parent, id, title, pos, size, style)
{
    this->SetSizeHints(wxDefaultSize, wxDefaultSize);

    wxBoxSizer* bSizer174;
    bSizer174 = new wxBoxSizer(wxVERTICAL);

    m_checkSitOut = new wxCheckBox(this, wxID_ANY, wxT("Deal Me Out"), wxDefaultPosition, wxDefaultSize, 0);

    bSizer174->Add(m_checkSitOut, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_buttonDealHand = new wxButton(this, wxID_DEALHAND, wxT("&Deal Hand"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(150,25), 0);
    bSizer174->Add(m_buttonDealHand, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_buttonFold = new wxButton(this, wxID_FOLD, wxT("&Fold"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(80,25), 0);
    bSizer174->Add(m_buttonFold, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_buttonCall = new wxButton(this, wxID_CALL, wxT("&Call"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(80,25), 0);
    bSizer174->Add(m_buttonCall, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_buttonRaise = new wxButton(this, wxID_RAISE, wxT("&Raise"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(80,25), 0);
    bSizer174->Add(m_buttonRaise, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_buttonLeaveTable = new wxButton(this, wxID_LEAVETABLE, wxT("&Leave Table"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(90,25), 0);
    bSizer174->Add(m_buttonLeaveTable, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_textDitchPlayer = new wxTextCtrl(this, wxID_DITCHPLAYER, wxEmptyString, wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(45,-1), wxTE_PROCESS_ENTER);
    bSizer174->Add(m_textDitchPlayer, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_checkPreFold = new wxCheckBox(this, wxID_ANY, wxT("FOLD"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(100,-1), 0);

    bSizer174->Add(m_checkPreFold, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_checkPreCall = new wxCheckBox(this, wxID_ANY, wxT("CALL"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(100,-1), 0);

    bSizer174->Add(m_checkPreCall, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_checkPreCallAny = new wxCheckBox(this, wxID_ANY, wxT("CALL ANY"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(100,-1), 0);

    bSizer174->Add(m_checkPreCallAny, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_checkPreRaise = new wxCheckBox(this, wxID_ANY, wxT("RAISE"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(100,-1), 0);

    bSizer174->Add(m_checkPreRaise, 0, wxALL, 5);

    m_checkPreRaiseAny = new wxCheckBox(this, wxID_ANY, wxT("RAISE ANY"), wxDefaultPosition, wxSize(100,-1), 0);

    bSizer174->Add(m_checkPreRaiseAny, 0, wxALL, 5);
```

#### 14 February 2010

Satoshi deletes what appears to be unfinished rudimtentary code for a p2p marketplace in a commit labeled ["strip out unfinished product, review and market stuff."](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/cc4b78d59f566ff43881f57797a16ce45eb1b80ez) Though the code was never finished, it suggests Satoshi intended for Bitcoin to be used in commerce early on.

Bitcoin developer Mike Hearn [commented](http://eigenjoy.com/2014/05/17/bitcoin-2014-amsterdam-day-two-notes/) on this years later.

>When Satoshi launched bitcoin he was working on a p2p marketplace and you would be able to rate buyers and sellers and the weight would be according to how much mining they had done. He realized there were more important priorities.

#### 14 July 2010

A <code>max_block_size</code> [value of 1MB](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/a30b56ebe76ffff9f9cc8a6667186179413c6349#diff-118fcbaaba162ba17933c7893247df3aR2614) set on the client.

#### 22 July 2010

The Bitcoin.org website on [Wayback Archive](https://web.archive.org/web/20100722094110/http://www.bitcoin.org:80/) lists the main advantages of Bitcoin on the homepage. In bold, it says:

> Bitcoin transactions are practically free, whereas credit cards and online payment systems typically cost 1-5% per transaction plus various other merchant fees up to hundreds of dollars.

#### 19 September 2010

After some discussion, Hal Finney, Satoshi (Bitcoin’s creator), and the user ‘Cryddit,’ who is Ray Dallingerr, on Bitcointalk imposed a [1MB default block size](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/172f006020965ae8763a0610845c051ed1e3b522) to reduce the chance of spam transactions hijacking blockspace, or the possibility of cheap DoS attacks. [Cryddit below explains why this limit was put in place:](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=946236.msg10388435#msg10388435)

>I'm the guy who went over the blockchain stuff in Satoshi's first cut of the bitcoin code.  Satoshi didn't have a 1MB limit in it. The limit was originally Hal Finney's idea.  Both Satoshi and I objected that it wouldn't scale at 1MB.  Hal was concerned about a potential DoS attack though, and after discussion, Satoshi agreed.  The 1MB limit was there by the time Bitcoin launched.  But all 3 of us agreed that 1MB had to be temporary because it would never scale.
>
>Several attempted "abuses" of the blockchain under the 1MB limit have proved Hal right about needing the limit at least for launching purposes.  A lot of people wanted to piggyback extraneous information onto the blockchain, and before miners (and the community generally) realized that blockchain space was a valuable resource they would have allowed it.  The blockchain would probably be several times as big a download now if that limit hadn't been in place, because it would have a lot of random 1-satoshi transactions that exist only to encode information for altcoins etc.
>
>At this point I don't think random schmoes who would allow just any transaction are getting a  lot of blocks. The people who have made a major investment in hashing power are doing the math to figure out which tx are worthwhile to include because block propagation time (and therefore the risk of orphan blocks) is proportional to block size. So at this point I think blockchain bloat as such is no longer likely to a problem, and the 1MB limit is no longer necessary.  It has been more-or-less replaced by a profitability limit that motivates people to not waste blockchain bandwidth, and miners are now reliably dropping transactions that don't pay fees. 

#### 01 December 2010

One of the [earliest posts](https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/eef3h/a_short_introduction_to_bitcoin_a_peer_to_peer/) on r/Bitcoin is made linking to an article titlted *A Short Introduction to Bitcoin - A Peer to Peer Cryptocurrency.* The [linked article](https://bluishcoder.co.nz/2010/10/10/a-short-introduction-to-bitcoin.html) describes the author's interest in Bitcoin's ability to offer micropayments.

>I'm interested in the approach of using bitcoin as a way to do micro-transactions and ease online payments and donations.

#### 16 June 2011

The original threads about the Silk Road on BitcoinTalk are [revealed to have been deleted,](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=17872.0) one of the earlier examples of censorship in Bitcoin. 

#### 29 June 2011

One early Bitcoiner comments that the Bitcoin [forums are becoming a horrible place to discuss things](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=17872.msg304289#msg304289) because of moderators censoring old threads and trolls.

>forum.bitcoin.org is the single worst place on the internet to talk about bitcoin.
>
>Dissenting voices are regularly shouted down or dismissed as trolls. Moderators are now deleting longstanding threads of great interest. The worst part is, in bitcoin-forumland, the internet is nothing but America.

#### 19 July 2011

r/bitcoin moderator u/AtlasLGo is [accused](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=30211.0) of trying to sell r/bitcoin. In the ensuing drama, someone contacts Reddit and he is removed along with three other mods we can see on the [WayBack Machine](https://web.archive.org/web/20110530125818/https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/new/) as late as May 2011.

Theymos becomes the new sole [moderator](https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=30211.msg381922#msg381922) and refuses to allow the old ones back in. We see him as the sole moderator on the WayBack machine in [September 2011.](https://web.archive.org/web/20110927021847/https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/new/)

Now former moderator u/edzillion [recounted](https://www.reddit.com/r/btc/comments/84djb8/did_theymos_purchase_rbitcoin_in_2011/dvqcdvp?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x) the story years later: 

>Atlas was basically inactive - it seemed the modding was going just fine (it was a very positive community in those early days) but then one day without any warning we were all kicked. It seems atlas was chatting with people over IRC and they were like how can you sell it? and he booted all the other mods in preparation for a sale.
>
>This caused a total shitstorm, as you can imagine, and the community basically shouted loud enough that the orig mod backed down and agreed to hand it over to whoever the community decided, which was theymos.
>
>Theymos wasn't much better - wouldn't re-add any of the kicked mods and held it alone himself on some kind of power trip. Things got quite unfriendly after that - partially because theymos is a typical angry asshole libertarian, and partially because the scene grew so much that it was hard to maintain a close community.
>
>After a while of lobbying to get back in and failing, I gave up on it but I still feel disabused by that situation. I put a lot of good work into making bitcoin and r/bitcoin what it is today. We were all crazy wide-eyed zealots back then shouting it from the rooftops. I figured I at least deserved some kind of explanation, let alone my modship (which, let's face it is a somewhat useful position in the btc world).


#### 30 July 2011

Greg Maxwell suggests that [Bitcoin can scale and remain decentralized.](https://web.archive.org/web/20140328052630/https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Talk:Scalability)

>When techies hear about how bitcoin works they frequently stop at the word "flooding" and say "Oh-my-god! that can't scale!". The purpose of this article is to take an extreme example, the peak transaction rate of Visa, and show that bitcoin could technically reach that kind of rate without any kind of questionable reasoning, changes in the core design, or non-existent overlays. As such, it's merely an extreme example— not a plan for how bitcoin will grow to address wider needs (as a decentralized system it is the bitcoin using public who will decide how bitcoin grows)— it's just an argument that shows that bitcoin's core design can scale much better than an intelligent person might guess at first.
>
>Dan rightly criticizes the analysis presented here— pointing out that operating at this scale would significantly reduce the decentralized nature of bitcoin: If you have to have many terabytes of disk space to run a "full validating" node then fewer people will do it, and everyone who doesn't will have to trust the ones who do to be honest. Dan appears (from his slides) to have gone too far with that argument: he seems to suggest that this means bitcoins will be controlled by the kind of central banks that are common today. His analysis fails for two reasons (and the second is the fault of this page being a bit misleading):
>
>First, even at the astronomic scale presented here the required capacity is well within the realm of (wealthy) private individuals, and certainly would be at some future time when that kind of capacity was required. A system which puts private individuals, or at least small groups of private parties, on equal footing with central banks could hardly be called a centralized one, though it would be less decentralized than the bitcoin we have today. The system could also not get to this kind of scale without bitcoin users agreeing collectively to increase the maximum block size, so it's not an outcome that can happen without the consent of bitcoin users.


